We'll be looking at verses 6-8 this evening, Genesis chapter 1 verses 6-8, and we continue
this evening our study on the days of creation, and we're now moving on to day number 2.
We have noted in our previous study the use of the word and in Genesis chapter 1, and
we have established the succession of events that are recorded here in Genesis chapter
1.
The last period of time between these verses, the literary use of this word and, and obviously
this evening as we study verses 6, 7, and 8, each of those verses begin with that word
and, and we see the succession of events, and even as we noted last week, it's a record
that's a day by day, step by step record of what God did during the week of creation.
In this usage, we understand that that creation week, of course, consisted of six literal
24 hour days.
We examined the first day of creation last week, and as we examine the first day of creation,
we're able to establish the understanding of the stability of the earth and how God
created the earth to be suitable for life.
We mentioned we used some, some, some different things last week to share with you that if
they're just a few minor variations on planet earth and in the cosmos and in a greater perspective,
that earth would then end up perhaps outside of that habitable zone because there's really
just a small zone that supports life and God, it didn't happen by chance, amen?
God designed it, He created it, He made it stable, He made it suitable for life.
We find that during the second day of creation, God created a firmament and He divided the
waters which were under the firmament from those which were above the firmament.
Beginning in verse number 6, the Bible says this, and God said, and we've noted this as
well that when God speaks, things happen, amen?
God said, let there be a firmament in the midst of the waters and let it, the firmament,
divide the waters from the waters.
And God made the firmament and divided the waters which were under the firmament from
the waters which were above the firmament, and then it says this, and it was so.
God called the firmament heaven and the evening and the morning were the second day.
As we think about these verses of Scripture and we see once again that statement God said
at the beginning of verse number 6 and at the end of verse number 7, and it was so,
that's going to be a repeated sequence that we find throughout the remainder of the account
in Genesis of the creation, and we find that God spoke and it was so.
The firmament that God created really is a demonstration of His omniscience, and we
mention this in the very first study.
Turn to the book of Psalms, if you will, Psalm 104, but in the very first study in the subject
of the book of Genesis as we began in chapter number 1 and we spoke about creation and we
talked about the fact that creation reveals to us the omnipotence of God that He has all
power, it also reveals to us the omniscience of God that He has all wisdom.
And here with the creation of the firmament, we see once again the demonstration of God's
omniscience.
The Bible says here in Psalm 104 in verse number 24, notice the declaration,
O LORD, how manifold are thy works!
And wisdom hast thou made them all, the earth is full of thy riches.
And what a powerful verse, and we mentioned as we spoke about the power of God and the
wisdom of God, how that God does possess all power and all wisdom, and here we find that
He called the firmament that He created, according to verse number 8, He called it heaven, and
God called the firmament heaven.
It is important for us to point out this evening as we study this second day of creation,
the atmospheric and climatic differences from the time of creation to present day.
These differences can be attributed directly to the firmament that was created on day number
2.
And we think about those atmospheric and climatic differences, we'll deal with a few of those
this evening, because really what we're finding is that these differences from creation until
today can best be attributed and explained by this firmament that God created.
Now, when God divided the waters, the Bible tells us in verse number 7, and God made the
firmament and He divided the waters which were under the firmament from the waters which
were above the firmament, and it was so.
So when God divided these waters, this is not the seas, we will find that that's dealt
with later in the creation, but we find that when God divided these waters, those that
were above the firmament, as is mentioned there in verse number 7, these waters God
suspended a large amount of water in vapor form above the earth.
Now, as we think about this firmament and this water in vapor form that would be there,
we understand that it would have to be in vapor form.
It would not be ice form or liquid form, it would be vapor form, and thus still being
able to see through it, as we would find later with creation with the sun and the moon and
the stars and so on and so forth.
If it were ice or if it were liquid, that would not be possible, and so we see that
it's vapor form.
But it reminds me of what Henry Morris observed, and many of you are familiar with the name
Henry Morris, and Henry Morris said this as he was making comment concerning the firmament.
He said that this firmament served as a thermal blanket or a vapor canopy over the entire
earth.
Now when you think about this idea of a thermal blanket or a vapor canopy that would be over
the whole earth, really what would happen is it would have caused the conditions on
earth.
We spoke about the atmospheric and climatic differences, and really what this particular
firmament would have done on earth during creation and in those early years of the existence
of earth and life would have provided that the conditions on earth would have been like
that of a greenhouse.
It really would have had a greenhouse effect upon the entire planet.
Now when we think about that, and we understand what God is doing here, and we want to dig
in and find out a little bit more about this firmament, we could simply just push right
through to day number three.
Alright, God created a firmament, but why did he create it?
What is the effect of the result of this firmament, and how does the creation account
of day number two that God created this firmament, how does it help me to understand the things
that we see in science today?
It's important for us to understand, because what happens is so many people, we've mentioned
this over and over and over, that evolution is shoved down the throats of our young people,
but it's not just our young people, it's being shoved down your throat and my throat as well.
We can watch programs, we can turn to various programs and look at various magazines and
what have you, and we're constantly being bombarded with this millions and millions
and all of this, where did life come from, and it's a lie of the devil, and it's interesting
as you study what several of these atheists, and even, not only do we have some atheists,
but we have some folks that would identify themselves as not necessarily being an atheist,
but being an anti-theist.
And being an anti-theist, they have motivation to try to come to a conclusion that there
is no God because they don't want there to be a God.
And so they will ignore evidence that is provided simply because they don't want to believe
that there's a God.
It's not necessarily an intellectual problem.
It's a will problem.
It's a heart problem.
See, we mentioned this in the very beginning of our study as we studied Genesis 1 but then
looked at Romans 1, man doesn't want to be accountable to the Creator God.
And so we find this evening that as we look at day number two of creation and we think
about this firmament, I want you to just think of a couple of results of this firmament,
this wisdom of God that was demonstrated here with creating on day number two the firmament,
I want you to just think about a couple of results.
The first one that we would consider is this.
The energy and heat from the sun would be redistributed which would result in the earth
having a greater percentage of the surface of the earth being habitable.
And so you would have, because of this canopy, for lack of a better term, because of this
water that was in vapor form that was over all of the earth in this greenhouse effect
and all that would take place, then the energy and the heat that would come from the sun.
Now God hasn't created the sun yet, remember?
He created light, energy, on day number one, but on day number two he creates this firmament
before he would create the sun and in so doing he's protecting the earth and he's making
the earth habitable.
It's a situation where this firmament would redistribute all of that energy and heat that
would come from the sun and it would be evenly distributed and you'd have really, what some
scientists have said, is that you would have almost on the entire surface of earth, that
is land, you would have a habitable zone that would seem like spring-like days.
Praise the Lord.
And I said, that's going to be like it is in the millennial. Amen? And praise the Lord for that.
But we find here that that would be one of the results of this firmament that God created.
Another result would be that that firmament would filter out radioactive waves
and other such things that could come from space and what have you.
And so it would have a filtering purpose as well.
The earth would have more consistent temperatures, and with those more consistent temperatures
there would be the absence of deserts and polar caps.
There also would be a significant reduction in air currents
because those air currents are produced by temperature differences over large areas.
And so again, these are the climatic type of impact and influences results of this firmament.
So you see how God is designing the earth to be habitable for life.
Now the one point that I'd like to make this evening,
and we could look at a number of those things of course with the air currents and what have you,
and you think about storms that would be created and the destruction and so on and so forth from some of those things.
But we find there would be a significant reduction of that because of the consistency of temperatures
along the earth because of that canopy.
But I want you to think about this particular result,
and we'll spend some time on this one, and that is the longevity of life.
The longevity of life.
The longevity of life that we'd speak of when we think about the firmament
would not only deal with plant life and animal life,
but more specifically and more of what we're concerned with is human life.
And you think about the longevity of life,
think about that greenhouse effect again if you can consider with me
and kind of think about God creating this firmament over the earth,
this canopy, this water in vapor form that would provide this canopy.
Remember the words of Henry Morris?
He said that it would serve as a thermal blanket or a vapor canopy,
thus resulting in the greenhouse effect,
and we'd understand how that would impact the longevity of life.
Thus we read of the patriarchs that Adam lived to be 930 years.
We read of Seth, 912 of course.
The oldest man ever recorded to live upon the face of the earth is Methuselah,
and he died at 969 years old.
And the ripe old age, amen, 969.
We find that Noah, of course, in Genesis chapter number 6,
that's when the flood was coming,
but Noah kind of bridging that timeline between pre-flood, post-flood,
we find that Noah lived to be 950 years old.
But it's interesting, because in just a few generations,
you can read in Genesis chapter number 35, verses 28 and 29,
that Isaac died at 180.
You say, well, 180 is old, not compared to 950.
Right?
Now, 180 for us, I don't know how much you need in a 401k to live to be 180.
I mean, you've got to really figure that out,
all these retirement planners, if you want to live to be whatever, 180, man.
But compared to 950, there's a big change, drastic difference.
From Isaac, in Genesis chapter number 35, dying at 180,
you come to Joseph's life in Genesis 50, in verse number 26,
and you find that Joseph was only 110.
Again, a decrease, significant decrease.
You look at 110 versus 180, but look at 110 versus 950.
Then you can read in Psalm 90, the Psalm of Moses,
in Psalm 90, in verse number 10, as Moses would utter these words,
and he says,
The days of our years are threescore years and ten,
and if by reason of strength they be fourscore years,
yet is there strength, labor, and sorrow,
for to soon cut off, and we fly away.
Seventy or eighty.
Now, 950, Noah, 70 or 80, right?
It's a huge difference.
So when we think about the effect, the result of this firmament,
we understand some of the climatic and some of the atmospheric things,
and I kind of brushed on those briefly and dealt with a few of those points,
but I want you to think about the longevity of life.
Now, not only would there be the longevity of human life,
but think about the longevity of plant life and animal life.
Now, the trees are going to grow a lot taller and a lot bigger,
the animals are going to grow bigger, and so on and so forth, right?
Why? Because of the longevity of life, because of the atmosphere,
because of the climate and the way in which God watered the earth.
Remember that there had been no rain.
When God had announced to Noah that it was going to rain,
it's like, what is rain?
But we find that in Genesis chapter number two,
that the way in which God had watered the earth up until the time of the flood
was through that mist.
And we find once again, this is a direct impact of this firmament
that was created on day number two.
Now, we look at these things and say, that's great.
And we can see that, man, God and his wisdom has created this firmament,
and we can think about the longevity of life,
and it helps us to explain why some of the patriarchs lived so long
and yet the life expectancy today is so decreased.
And of course, we could also talk about genetics with that as well,
because of sin and so on and so forth.
But we find that there is a huge effect from the atmosphere and the climate.
Why? Because of this firmament.
Now, the results are evident of what we dealt with here.
The results of this particular firmament that was created on day number two
are evident in the fossil records.
They're evident in the fossil records.
The reason they're evident in the fossil records
is because you'll find today, if you're to look at the fossil records,
that many of the fossils, plants and animals,
that you would find in the fossil records
are larger than comparative specimens that are alive today.
Well, why? Well, because of this firmament.
Again, the life being longer and so on and so forth,
and those conditions that would be appropriate for the growth
and the progress of life, so on and so forth.
It's also interesting, if you begin to study and to look into the location
of fossil records, where they're found.
Where there are fossils found in places where those particular fossils,
whether they're plant or animal, shouldn't be there.
But they're there. So how'd they get there?
Well, when we look at this thing of the firmament
and we understand the account of creation,
it helps us to be able to look at these things from a biblical worldview
and give a Bible answer.
We'll get to that in just a moment as we finish up this evening,
kind of come full circle.
But there's also this evidence that we'd find as we think about
this thing of the creation on day number two of the firmament.
And it's a simple idea of coal.
Now, I'm not a coal miner, not the son of a coal miner.
I've never been in a coal mine.
But evolution would tell us that coal is the result of millions of years.
And it would require millions of years for coal to form.
And basically, in a nutshell, what happens is plants and trees,
they die, they're buried under water and soil.
And then after a period of time, because of the heat and the pressure,
the dead plants turn into coal.
But there's something interesting.
One of the largest coal deposits that's known is in Antarctica.
How many trees have you got down there in Antarctica?
Right? Now think about it.
And we think about this large coal deposit that's in Antarctica,
and we'd understand, again, when we understand the firmament,
we understand what God is doing.
See, so often we think about the days of creation,
we just kind of blow right through it.
Verses 6, 7, and 8 in about 14 seconds.
I mean, just get through it and just move right on through the creation account
and not really maybe fully comprehend,
what was it that God created on day number 2?
Why was it that God created this firmament?
What purpose did this firmament serve?
God was demonstrating his wisdom in creating this firmament.
Now, when we think about these things,
and again, just a few evidences from science and what have you,
we would find that modern scientific observation today
would conclude that there is no water anywhere in some canopy.
It's not there.
Well, we have already kind of established the fact that it's not there
because of stating in the way of introduction
that there are atmospheric and climatic changes,
differences, vast differences between creation and today.
So when these modern scientists make their observations,
they say, hey, there's no water anywhere.
Well, there's an explanation.
What happened?
It's a thing called the flood.
The global flood.
And we begin to understand the Bible, and we begin to understand what God told us,
the thing that changed,
and the impact upon the climate and the atmosphere and so on and so forth
can be attributed to how things change with this firmament
during the time of the flood.
Look at Genesis chapter number 7, if you will,
and I want you to notice what God announced that was going to happen.
Of course, in Genesis chapter number 6,
God announced the impending judgment upon the earth
that he was going to create.
cause it to flood and and he was going to destroy man that he had created but
we come to chapter number seven and we find in verse number four that the Bible
says this God of course is speaking to Noah giving him the directions and he
says this for yet seven days it's coming I mean we're coming seven more days and
it's coming and I will cause it to rain upon the earth forty days and forty
nights and every living substance that I have made will I destroy from off the
face of the earth with our current atmospheric conditions scientists would
tell us that is impossible for it to rain for 40 days and 40 nights upon the
whole earth bottom line there's not enough water just not possible however
with the waters that are above with that firmament it is absolutely possible and
that's what happened during the flood notice what Peter says turn to second
Peter chapter number three and I want you to notice what Peter says now Peter
is dealing with in second Peter in particular dealing with a group of
people that were in need of direction or instruction in first Peter he is dealing
with a group of people that are really in need of encouragement the people in
first Peter and they're suffering they're going through trials fiery
trials as they're described in the fourth chapter and they were in need of
encouragement Peter was used by the Lord to encourage them in second Peter there
was a need for instruction their false teachers and all of this difficulty of
all of these things that were coming in they were promising liberty but they
were the surface servants of corruption and so on and so forth and Peter in the
third chapter of second Peter he begins to describe these scoffers and he says
this in verse number three of second Peter 3 knowing this first that there
shall come in the last days scoffers walking after their own lust now
remember in chapter number 2 Peter had established the truth that there would
be false teachers and it was based upon the fact that in the Old Testament there
were false prophets just as there were false prophets then there shall be false
teachers today and that's the established truth in chapter number 2 he
deals with some of their characteristics and so on and so forth but he tells them
this in verse number 3 knowing this first that there shall come in the last
days by the way we're in the last days scoffers and it says this walking after
their own lusts they remember they don't want to acknowledge that there is a God
they have an agenda they have a desire to be able to say that there is no God
and so these scoffers here's what Peter says that they're gonna say and saying
verse number four where is the promise of his coming see Jesus had promised
that he was going to return right and Jesus had said to the disciples in fact
Peter was there when Jesus said let not your hearts be troubled you believe in
God believe also in me in my father's house or many mansions if it were not so
I would have told you I go to prepare a place for you and if I go I will come
again and receive you unto myself that where I am there ye may be also John 14
1 through 3 Peter heard those words and now he says there's gonna be some
scoffers that are going to say where is the promise of his coming he said he was
coming but he hasn't come yet because it's not time because God's gonna come
when it's time Jesus is gonna be right on time not a moment early not a moment
late right on time notice the truth of the first coming of Christ that the
Bible says in the book of Galatians when the fullness of time was come God sent
forth his son born of a virgin made under the law now think about that it
was the exact time it was the when that when that when the fullness of time was
come what listen when it's time for Jesus to return nobody no power no
anything can keep him from coming he's coming but they're gonna some where's
the promise of his coming and here's what they're going to say for since the
fathers fell asleep all things continue as they were from the beginning of the
creation now I do notice something interesting in the argument of the the
scoffers here they didn't actually deny creation that's interesting we won't get
into all of that this evening but they didn't actually in the first century
they were saying where's the promise of his coming and they were saying that all
things continue as they ever have been from the beginning of the creation they
can and then here's what it says Peter says this this is the answer to these
scoffers beginning in verse number five for this they willingly are ignorant of
that by the Word of God the heavens were of old in the earth look at how he says
it's standing out of the water and in the water whereby the world that then
was being overflowed with water perished but the heavens and the earth which are
now by the same word are kept in store reserved under fire against the day of
judgment and perdition of ungodly men he then tells them that great promise in
verse number nine the Lord is not slack concerning his promise but as long
suffering to us were not willing that any should perish but that all should
come to repentance notice that the answer that Peter gave to these scoffers
in verses five through seven when they said all things continue as they were
from the beginning of the creation Peter says they're willingly ignorant of this
one thing now willing ignorance is a real problem it's one thing to be
ignorant to be uninformed to not have the truth and there are people that we
meet all of the time that are like honestly they are ignorant they've never
been given the truth but there are some people that are willingly ignorant don't
mess with me with the facts I'm living my life the way I want to I don't want
any God to have any control over me and so don't mess with me of this they're
willingly ignorant now that here Paul or excuse me Peter he says they're
willingly ignorant of this truth that by the Word of God the heavens were of old
in the earth standing out of the water and in the water he's speaking about
this firmament that was created on day number two and he just speaks about this
furnace that was created on day number two he then says whereby the world that
then was being overflowed with water perished it rained for 40 days and 40
nights the deeps opened up and we'll study that in detail as we get into
Genesis 6 7 and look at all of the catastrophic event of the flood but we
find that then Peter says this in verse number 7 but the heavens and the earth
which are now there's a change remember they were saying in verse number 5 all
things continue as they were from the beginning of the creation and Peter
saying no there was a catastrophic event that changed the atmosphere in the
climate and it was I mean it was a catastrophic event it's called the flood
and Peter says that that world that was it was over flood of overflowed with
water but the earth the heavens in the earth that which are now look at what it
says by the same word are kept in store reserved under fire against the day of
judgment and perdition of ungodly men by the way God's not going to destroy the
water the earth with a flood again he promised that in Genesis 8 to Noah and
that promise stands but he will destroy the earth with fire I told you in Sunday
school several weeks ago there was an article that came across my phone from
Fox News about how the you know all these people talking about climate
change and and the world's gonna end in 12 years and all this sort of thing I
told Holly the other day the Bible tells me if I understand the timeline right
that once the rapture takes place there's seven years of tribulation then
there's a thousand years of millennial and then the end and so therefore
there's at least a thousand and seven years left as far as I'm concerned 12
years I don't even need to read the article amen and but there's another
article that came to talking about the effects of global warming and how these
ice caps are gonna melt and it's gonna flood the earth God said he wasn't gonna
flood the earth again I don't need to waste my time reading it because I've
already been given the truth of God and by the way his authority is perfect
authority I don't need to be I don't even need to be messed with that stuff
you're not true but here we find that it's by the Word of God by the same Word
remember and God said and it was so by the Word of His power or the power of
His Word and we think about this now modern physics it's interesting as we go
back to Genesis 1 and we think about this firmament that was created on day
number 2 and we see what God did how he divided the waters which were under the
firmament from the waters which are above the firmament he made this vapor
canopy kind of a thermal blanket if you will to create this greenhouse effect
that would allow for just mankind a life in general to thrive upon planet
earth and the zone of the habitable zone of earth would be vastly larger than it
is today because you would not have all of those
Differences in climate and so on and so forth, but we find here today that here's what modern physics says
we cannot produce a
viable
model for this firmament
Therefore it must not exist
Basically is what they boil down to because we can't figure out how it could be
There are problems with the weight there are problems with the amount of energy that would be necessary to keep that much water in vapor
Form and blah blah blah blah blah
And at the bottom of their argument the end of their argument is that since we can't figure it out
It must not be you forgot God
Because all the while they're trying to deny the existence of God
And so our young people are being fed this nonsense, and they're being told all of this
No, you can't believe it because we can't provide a model of it
Remember our verse in
Psalm 104 in verse number 24. I'll read it to you again as
We wrap up this evening remember the verse. Oh, Lord
How manifold are thy works in?
Wisdom has now made them all
The earth is full of thy riches God in his power and in his wisdom
Created a firmament on day number two. It's not there anymore
The water's not there the vapor. It's not in vapor form
It's not there why because of the catastrophic flood in Genesis chapter number six and seven
God says gonna rain. Where's the rain gonna come from? Where's the water gonna come from for 40 days and 40 nights?
the firmament the waters that were there and
God calls that rain. It was a global flood by the way
We'll deal with that as we get into the text
In several weeks as we get into Genesis 6 7 & 8 and we find that it's not a regional flood is a global flood by
the way, there's over
215 or 20 something like that number of
various places around the world that have in their
folklore and what-have-you
references of a global flood
It's amazing in
China well, I'll deal with that later. Let me just say this we get back to the firmament
When we have a literal
Interpretation of the Word of God and we take the biblical account
It makes so much sense. I
Don't have to understand everything. I don't have to be able to answer some modern
physicist and what their question is because they're not including God in their equation and
God remember chapter number one verse number one in the beginning God created Bara
He called into existence from nothing
He upholds turn over to Isaiah 40 and we'll close with this verse we're out of time Isaiah 40 I
Don't have it my notes. Let me hope it's the right verse here. Yes in verse 22
Isaiah 40 in verse number 22
Speaking of God, by the way, Isaiah like 40 through 45 46
powerful powerful passages of Scripture that just speak about our God and how wonderful he is and how he
Stands I mean remember all of the idolatry and all of that and just speaking of God and who he is and the power that he
Possesses but Isaiah 40 in verse 22
it is he speaking of God Jehovah that sitteth upon the circle of the earth and the inhabitants thereof are as
grasshoppers that stretches out the heavens as a curtain and
Spreadeth them out as a tent to dwell in now think about that imagery. I mean listen, this is no problem for God
He's God
The Lord God omnipotent
reigneth and
When he has all wisdom
combined with all power
He can create a firmament that will allow for life to thrive upon this earth
We serve a great God in the beginning God created we wrote we've studied day number one
We come to day number two and we see that on day number two
God created the firmament as we continue to move through the study of creation in the week of creation
We will find how God continues to prepare the earth for life
Let's pray together Father